## [Go to our Homepage](https://charlie-gulian.github.io/silver-garbanzo/)

# If Happiness is Anticipation with Certainty, Then I'm Unhappy

### A short exploration of energy, information, and their impacts on health


While reading Toni Morrison's *The Bluest Eye*, I came across a rather innocent line that has stuck with me the moment I first heard it. I found the book on Audible, on  the recommendation of my new friend to listen to audiobooks on trail runs, though I quickly realized that her soothing voice was not exactly the inspiration I needed to push through the last mile in 90 degree weather. Clocking in at over 7 hours, I could only sweep the floor and do laundry so many times before I ran out of the mundane medium that suits audiobooks so perfectly. 

I decided ultimately to purchase the book from Barnes and Noble, where an old friend's employee discount saved me a dollar and 50 cents. After reading just the first few pages, I was surprised to come up to the quote that I had belabored to reach in the audiobook. The two young sisters who befriend Pecola--Claudia and Frieda--are introduced to Mr. Henry, a guest of their parents:

*"Want a penny?" He held out a shiny coin to us.
Frieda lowered her head, too pleased to answer. I reached for it. He snapped his thumb and forefinger, and the penny disappeared. Our shock was laced with delight. We searched all over him, poking our fingers into his socks, looking up the inside back of his coat. **If happiness is anticipation with certainty, then we were happy.** And while we waited for the coin to reappear, we knew we were amusing Mama and Daddy.*

If happiness is anticipation with certainty, then we were happy. Happiness occurs when we are able to look forward to something, and have no doubt that it will happen. Certainty is something that we believe to happen with probability one. To use the probabilistic term, it happens *almost surely.* However, if there is some degree of uncertainty, then can we be truly happy? There is a collection of outcomes, finite, countably infinite, or uncountably infinite, and unless we are omniscient, then we cannot be guaranteed any one outcome. If there was a non-zero probability that the penny disappeared forever, then Claudia and Frieda would not be able to go to the store to get a Mary Jane candy. However, their assurance of a good outcome is such that the action of finding the penny is joyful. 

It follows, then, that one of the main goals of the human experience is to seek out the resolution of uncertainty. After meeting our basic, caloric (energetic) needs, we find both great pleasure in learning new things and great disquiet in not knowing--whether it's the news or the tea. Furthermore, we feel badly when we suboptimally utilize our resources, whether that is our money, our youth, or our energy. Energy and information are two fundamental quantities of our existence. 

A useful historical framework is the comparison between the industrial revolution and the information age. Whereas the industrial revolution was a revolution in energy--society was able to harness natural resources such as coal and convert it into all forms of thermal, mechanical, and electrical energy and elevate billions of people out of poverty--the information age is more aptly characterized as a revolution in information--the conversion of mountains of data to create information that is used to optimize the operation of systems of interaction. One can view life as an minimization problem with a noisy loss function, or equivalently as a maximization problem with a noisy utility function, continually being updated as new information arrives. Energy is the fuel to the system--the computing power. Information is a much more abstract concept--not everyone has the same goals and so their collection of decision frameworks is unique. 


The targets of an information revolution are numerous. We have used it to better understand the human condition, such as mapping the brain. We have used it to manage finite resources with less error (or greater efficiency) as we reach the limits of uncapped growth. We have used it to more primally appeal to people's predilections, such as worrying about violent crime or looking at hot women on Instagram. 

Most importantly, though, it has laid bare the question of what makes us truly happy. If energy gave us the power to *do*, information gives us the power to *be*. Utility functions that target trends rather than stories fail to account for the fact that there's no point in doing anything if you aren't happy about it. It does make the assertion that ignorance as bliss more powerful. It seems almost counterintuitive that the more information that we seek, the more that we are hurt. However, it does manifest similarly with energy, for if we consume too much food, we also observe adverse health outcomes. In this way, the energy and information loss functions (assuming they are convex) must necessarily have bounded minima (or at least be non-monotonic). 

The parallels between energy's ability to control physical health and information's ability to control mental health of course ignore that each is a mediating variable for the other--the brain uses 20% of the body's energy, and we use our body of knowledge and collection of decision frameworks to make choices with our body that have positive outcomes for our physical health. 

I am afraid to touch the concept of entropy because I feel that it is so powerful that I struggle to understand the full relationship between information entropy and thermodynamic entropy. Fascinatingly, entropy is borrowed from the Greek word for transformation (entropia). Thermodynamic entropy is the observation of systems' tendency towards disorder, while information entropy is the observation of systems' tendency towards uncertainty. Claude Shannon's framework was designed around the probability of random losses of information in telecommunication channels, which manifest as entropy in the context of statistical mechanics. Either way, whereas it is the natural order of the universe to tend towards randomness and disorder, it is our constant struggle with the universe to make order and certainty our way of life, and it is in this way that we finally succumb to physical and mental frailties in old age. 

The question then becomes: if it is the universe's way to move us towards randomness, then how do we cope with it? Do we fight it? Or do we let it wash over us? It seems that our initial definition of happiness is limiting in that it is defined in direct opposition to the nature of the universe. A better way to view the world is to understand that even in the most trivial of closed systems, there are more possible outcomes than we could possibly imagine, and to *expect surprise*, no matter how it manifests. We are best off avoiding counterfactuals, since they are of very little use in resolving our uncertainty. 
